[BLOG] Recreate Numba polynomial post from #769 (#789)
Quansight/Quansight-website: apps/labs/posts/numba-polynomial-support.md

---
title: 'Adding support for polynomials to Numba'
authors: [kristian-minchev]
published: November 8, 2023
description: 'My work was focused on improving NumPy support in Numba, with focus on the polynomial package.'
category: [PyData ecosystem]
featuredImage:
  src: /posts/numba-polynomial-support/feature_grayscale-hi_res.png
  alt: >
    An image containing photos of Kristian Minchev, intern at Quansight Labs, and Guilherme Leobas, Kristian's mentor during the internship.
hero:
  imageSrc: /posts/numba-polynomial-support/hero.png
  imageAlt: 'An image containing the logos of Numba and NumPy next to each other.'
---

<div class="flex flex-col lg:flex-row w-full h-[22em] md:h-[20em] lg:h-[10em] gap-y-0 lg:gap-x-10 items-center">
  <div class="w-full lg:w-3/5">
    Hi, my name is Kristian Minchev. In this blog post, I will be talking about my
    experience as a summer intern at Quansight Labs working on enhancing NumPy
    support in Numba. In particular, my work was focused on adding support for the

>     Polynomial class as well as other functions from the polynomial API.

Author: ```suggestion
    `Polynomial` class as well as other functions from the polynomial API.
```

  </div>
  <div class="flex flex-row w-4/5 mr-8 md:mr-0 md:w-3/5 lg:mx-0 lg:w-2/5 lg:self-start">
    <div class="w-1/2">
      <img alt="Numba logo."
          src="/posts/numba-polynomial-support/numba_logo.png" 
          class="h-[8em] lg:h-1/2 mx-auto lg:mt-4" />
    </div>
    <div class="w-1/2">
      <img alt="Quansight Labs logo."
          src="/posts/numba-polynomial-support/qlabs_logo.png" 
          class="h-[8em] lg:h-1/2 mx-auto lg:mt-4" />
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

## What is Numba?

[Numba](https://numba.pydata.org/) is a just-in-time compiler for Python that

> translate a subset of Python and NumPy into fast machine code. The most common

Author: ```suggestion
translates a subset of Python and NumPy into fast machine code. The most common
```

way to use Numba is through its collection of decorators that can be applied to
your functions to instruct Numba to compile them.

When a call is made to a function using the `@jit` decorator from Numba, it is

> compiled to machine code “just-in-time” for execution and all or part of your

Author: 'part or all' is the more common English phrasing.

```suggestion
compiled to machine code “just-in-time” for execution, and part or all of your
```

code can subsequently run at native machine code speed! Numba reads the Python
bytecode for a decorated function and combines this with information about the
types of the input arguments to the function. It analyzes and optimizes your
code, and finally uses the [LLVM compiler infrastructure](https://llvm.org/) to
generate a machine code version of your function, tailored to your CPU
capabilities. This compiled version is then used when your function is called.

The Numba `@jit` decorator fundamentally operates in two compilation modes,
`nopython` mode and `object` mode. The behaviour of the `nopython` compilation
mode is to essentially compile the decorated function so that it will run
entirely without the involvement of the Python interpreter. This is the

> recommended and best-practice way to use the Numba jit decorator as it leads to

Author: ```suggestion
recommended and best-practice way to use the Numba `@jit` decorator as it leads to
```

> the best performance. It is important to note that nopython mode is not

Author: ```suggestion
the best performance. It is important to note that `nopython` mode is not
```

guaranteed to compile successfully. This can happen if there are unsupported
functions or classes which are used in the scope of the `@jit` decorator.

<center>
  <img
    alt="Numba schematic showing different stages of compilation."
    src="/posts/numba-polynomial-support/numba-schematic.png"
    class="mb-0 mt-16"
    />
  <br/>
  <i>How Numba works. Taken from <a href="https://towardsdatascience.com numba-weapon-of-mass-optimization-43cdeb76c7da">here</a>.</i>
</center>

## Increasing support for NumPy functions in Numba

One of the current priorities of Numba is having seamless integration with
NumPy. As an intern at Quansight Labs, my main task was extending the list of
NumPy functions that are supported by Numba. Since Numba does not understand
calls to NumPy functions, developers have to reimplement such functions. The
easiest way to do so is using the `@numba.extending.overload` decorator, which
lets the developer write a new implementation of the function in Python. The new
implementation needs to have the same behaviour as the original function, but it

> should also be completely supported by Numba, e.g. it cannot call NumPy

Author: Depending on the specific intent for the meaning here, "i.e.," might be the better choice.

It depends on whether "it cannot call NumPy functions which are not supported yet" is the _single_ reason why a reimplementation would not be suitable (we'd use 'i.e.'), or one of multiple reasons why it would not be suitable (we'd use 'e.g.').

```suggestion
should also be completely supported by Numba; e.g., it cannot call NumPy
```

Reviewer: there's probably more reasons - accepting the suggestion.

functions which are not supported yet. Most importantly, its return type should
depend only on the input types and never on the particular values of the inputs.

Numba developers keep track of unsupported NumPy functions in
[issue #4074](https://github.com/numba/numba/issues/4074). My first task was
simple: pick a function from the list and implement it. I started by searching
the list for functions that have already been implemented or ones that have been
deprecated by NumPy. Then, I decided to pick the function `numpy.geomspace`,
since a very similar function, `numpy.logspace`, had been implemented already,
and this was a great starting point for me. This helped me introduce myself to
the Numba development workflow and the repository structure.

> After my first Pull Request was merged, I moved on to other functions from the

Author: I don't usually see this written as a proper noun.

```suggestion
After my first pull request was merged, I moved on to other functions from the
```

> list. Other NumPy functions that I added support as a Quansight Labs intern

Author: ```suggestion
list. Other NumPy functions for which I added support as a Quansight Labs intern
```

include `numpy.vsplit`, `numpy.hsplit`, `numpy.dsplit`, `numpy.rowstack`,
`numpy.diagflat`, `numpy.resize`, `numpy.indices` and `numpy.unwrap`. A great
guide to using the `@overload` decorator is given in the
[Numba documentation](https://numba.readthedocs.io/en/stable/extending/overloading-guide.html#a-guide-to-using-overload).

## The NumPy polynomial API

When choosing functions to implement, I was always looking for groups of similar

> functions. That way, I could get more functions checked from the list more

Author: ```suggestion
functions. That way, I could get more functions checked off of the list more
```

> quickly. This led me to implementing `polyadd, polysub, polymul` from

Author: ```suggestion
quickly. This led me to implementing `polyadd`, `polysub`, and `polymul` from
```

> `numpy.polynomial.polynomial` simultaneously. After seeing this, my mentor asked

Author: ```suggestion
`numpy.polynomial.polynomial` simultaneously.

After seeing this, my mentor asked
```

me if I would like to focus on support for the NumPy polynomial package. I

> agreed since I felt like this would be a good way of working with lower levels

Author: ```suggestion
agreed, since I felt like this would be a good way of working with lower levels
```

of Numba. In addition to adding other functions from the polynomial API, the
biggest task during my internship was implementing the `Polynomial` class. It is
fairly simple as it has three parameters - `coef`, `domain`, and `window`, each
of which is a NumPy array. This meant that the foundation of the implementation
was fairly straightforward. Unfortunately, there were a lot of details in the
behaviour of the class, and each small detail seemed challenging when I had to
implement it using the low-level API. The most interesting thing about the

> implementation of the class is that the two optional parameters - `domain` and

Author: ```suggestion
implementation of the class is that the two optional parameters, `domain` and
```

`window`, have default values that are NumPy arrays of integer dtype, whereas if
the user decides to set `domain` and `window`, then these arrays are always cast
to arrays of double dtype. This meant that the user could never set the values
of these two parameters to their default values. I have opened
[pull request #24745](https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/24745) in NumPy that
aims to improve this behaviour for all classes in the `numpy.polynomial`
package.

> ## Adding support for Power Series in Numba

Author: Keeping consistent to sentence case in headings

```suggestion
## Adding support for power series in Numba
```

## Adding support for power series in Numba

Similarly to functions, NumPy classes have to be reimplemented in Numba using
its low-level API. A good example of this can be found in the
[Numba documentation](https://numba.readthedocs.io/en/stable/extending/interval-example.html#example-an-interval-type),
which I followed very closely. The first big task when working on the
`Polynomial` class was defining a new Numba type to represent the class. After
creating a type class called `PolynomialType`, I needed to "show" Numba that
each instance of the `Polynomial` class should be treated by Numba as if its
type is `PolynomialType`, using the

> `@typeof_impl.register(np.polynomial.polynomial.Polynomial)` decorator. Another

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`@typeof_impl.register` decorator with `np.polynomial.polynomial.Polynomial` as its argument . Another
```

> important part is defining the constructor for the Polynomial class. We decided

Author: ```suggestion
important part is defining the constructor for the `Polynomial` class. We decided
```

this point. The next step is to define a data model for the new type. That is,

> how the Polynomial type will be represented in LLVM IR.

Author: ```suggestion
how the `Polynomial` type will be represented in the LLVM IR.
```

The final task when adding support for a new type in Numba is defining special
methods for converting Python objects into native values and vice versa. Those

> operations are called boxing and unboxing. The idea being that a Python object

Author: ```suggestion
operations are called boxing and unboxing. The idea here is that a Python object
```

can be seen as a sophisticated box containing a simple native value which is

> what the data model needs. The tricky part in my implementation of those two was

Author: ```suggestion
what the data model needs. The tricky part in my implementation of these two methods was
```

that I had to keep track of whether the `domain` and `window` were defined by

> the user or they equal the default value. This part is necessary since the

Author: ```suggestion
the user or they were equal to their default values. This part is necessary since the
```

default values of those two parameters can never be set using the constructor,
as mentioned above.

## Further work on support for NumPy polynomials

> Thanks to the support I have received from my mentor -
> [Guilherme Leobas](https://github.com/guilhermeleobas). After the respective
> pull request is closed, there is a lot of room for further work. For example,

Author: This doesn't seem like the right place to thank Guilherme--that's down below, where he's already thanked.

```suggestion
Even after my pull requests were merged, there is still a lot of room for further work. For example,
```

> NumPy supports 5 more types of polynomials - Chebyshev Series, two types of

Author: Per styleguide, usually spell with words for 20 and below.

I'm _guessing_ that 'series' should be lowercase here, but I'm not sure.

```suggestion
NumPy supports five more types of polynomials: Chebyshev series, two types of
```

Hermite series, Laguerre, and Legendre. All of those have the same class

> structure as the Power Series, but the behaviour of their methods is different

Author: ```suggestion
structure as the power series, but the behaviour of their methods is different.
```

> which reflects the different kinds of operations that are being done on them,

Author: ```suggestion
These differences reflect the different kinds of operations that are being done on them:
```

> e.g. the coefficients array of a product of two Chebyshev series is not the same

Author: ```suggestion
e.g., the coefficients array of a product of two Chebyshev series is not the same
```

---
title: 'Adding support for polynomials to Numba'
authors: [kristian-minchev]
published: September 18, 2023
description: 'My work was focused on improving NumPy support in Numba, with focus on the polynomial package.'
category: [PyData ecosystem]
featuredImage:
  src: /posts/numba-polynomial-support/feature_grayscale.png
  alt: >
    An image containing photos of Kristian Minchev, intern at Quansight Labs, and Guilherme Leobas, Kristian's mentor during the internship.
hero:
  imageSrc: /posts/numba-polynomial-support/hero.png
  imageAlt: 'An image containing the logos of Numba and NumPy next to each other.'
---

Hi, my name is Kristian Minchev. In this blog post, I will be talking about my experience as a summer intern at Quansight Labs working on enhancing NumPy support in Numba. In particular, my work was focused on adding support for the Polynomial class as well as other functions from the polynomial API.

<p float="right">
  <img alt="Numba logo."
       src="/posts/numba-polynomial-support/numba_logo.png" width="45%" />
  <img alt="Quansight Labs logo."
       src="/posts/numba-polynomial-support/qlabs_logo.png"
       width="45%" /> 

> </p>

Author: A question about this, @KrisMinchev: were you trying to get the Numba and Labs logos to float to the right of the text introducing yourself (starting on line 16)? Else, please explain what you'd like this to look like.

Either way, I should be able to get it set up how you were imagining.
